Essay: An unreliable narrative
  …The term unreliable narrator is coined by Wayne C. Booth in his book “the Rhetoric of Fiction.” 
  An article in the British Medical Journal published in March 2,000 mentioned that the doctors’ predictions about patient survival time are accurate in 20% of cases. Medicine is supposed to be an accurate science but sometime number tells a different story. Doctors’ predictions join in accuracy those of the weatherman’s forecast in guessing the future weather. Both fields rely heavily on hard data for prediction yet in some case the accuracy of their prediction leaves much to be desired. What factors render their predictions so inaccurate? One deal with men the other deal with nature, both undergo extensive training to earn their degree but is training enough to make good doctors or weathermen or they need something else?
  In some country doctors are called Artzmittel which means art and medicine. Art and medicine, does it imply practicing the certitude (medicine) with incertitude (art) or practicing the incertitude with certitude? Anyway the doctor-actor uttering a certain play (medicine) with incertitude is an acceptable choice. Let us start with that notion. Is the play uncertain in form or content? Or both?  Uncertainty leads to unreliability and the actor morphs into an unreliable narrator. Can a doctor be an unreliable doctor? Rather under what circumstances a doctor becomes an unreliable narrator?
  In literature an unreliable narrative can be unreliable in forms or contents. Narrative infiltrates every aspect of human activities. From art to politics every activity can be narrated. Medicine shares the same fate, Columbia University offers a course in narrative medicine to keep up with the time. In narrative you have the narrator role but understanding a narrative also suggest a reader responsibility in understanding the text based on post- structuralism theory. Traditionally medicine or the medical world has a paternalistic attitude, it decides what is good for patient but in a modern era this attitude is becoming obsolete. Doctors have to adapt to new realities: patients are coming to the examination room with print outs from their computers. The patients become educated and decision becomes a share mental exercise, but the odds still favor the doctor. That “unfair” advantage positions put the doctor in a delicate stature. Room for maneuver tightens, the expectations become greater, and an error becomes easily a tragedy with the ensuing legal, financial and psychological consequences. What are the doctors’ defenses? Besides knowledge, it requires the skills to decipher the needs and expectations of the patients. Besides healing the physical wounds the physicians need to heal the psychological distresses caused by the body injuries. All those goals require a correct appreciation on the patient’s feelings, an accurate guess of their expectations while respecting their beliefs. Missing those goals invites future disasters or conflicts. Understanding patients’ feelings, meeting their expectations the physician will only then earn the patients’ trust. This emotional bonding will spare future difficulties for the doctors. In order to achieve that goal, physicians should learn first how to listen, for the reason that listening is a form of speech according to Rita Charon, author of the book Narrative in medicine. It allows the physician to reduce the distance between the narrator (doctor) and reader (patient). Reducing the distance allows the facilitation of empathy it also allows the patient to be the narrator  in first person a movement that helps regains his confidence, for illness not only physically but mentally damages his identity.  Call it “therapeutic speech”, and that is the first step toward healing. The literary community cautions the value, veracity of the first person, but it allows the patient to vent his ordeal. Because illness at times destroys the person identity and integrity and put the patient into doubt because he loses his footing. Venting his ordeal lets the patient feels that his distress has been heard and makes him feels that he is still part of human community and not an alien or a “being” not in being. For a long time illness has been described by intended authors foreign to the suffering, an outsider. Medical doctors learn disease through a second person or intermediary. They rarely appreciate the genuine distresses, emotions or feelings. They see blood gushing out the patients’ wound, not knowing how the wounded feel when they lost a limb and its consequence on patients’ psychological state: phantom limb reflects well the long lasting effect on patients’ memory. “The stories built by physicians or scientists do have an impact on patient vital and mental survival and shaping the patients’ future behavior”. As one author says:” the way the others story us can have very concrete implications for our material, professional, social and psychological well being. It can destroy or enhance a career, make us feel good about ourselves, or throw us in despair, improve our social standing or turn us into outcasts.” (Book Translation and conflict: a narrative account by Mona Baker). Learning disease through a third person- narrator will limit the accuracy of the knowledge: it can be subjective but it is a remote, cold and devoid of feeling knowledge or beliefs. For medicine deals with human being and this “being” has a mental component in addition to the physical component. Kant, Heidegger, others tried to define the notion of being but the public is far from grasping their concept. But the Being is there, it presence felts in every activity of the living world.
  The resulting expected changes: those processes force the patients to adapt or change their original identity (original being) to a new environment (the disease world). These processes, most of the time, are regressive in nature (regressive narrative). The regressive narrative: “you will lose the ability to ….” will create in patients the belief of an invalid being: the body is here but not the mind. Some case of regressive narrative may have a u shape curve: you will feel sick before you feel better (no pain no gain they said) but who will guarantee you that tomorrow by this time you will feel definitively better? The thing that makes medicine uncertain is the recovery or healing process. All they know is healing takes time. Or times. And who will tell me “what time” it takes to heal? Or how long does it take? Will I be the same being like before or simply the fact of “being able” to live without the help of assisting devices is called healing? When and where does it (the healing) stop? to a former initial state or higher, lower state? In some cases scar instead of filling the void caused by the wound becomes a keloid or “a growth “. Imagine a keloid in your face or breast…Healing sometime can make us become a monster. The phenomenon “Lost in translation” in healing becomes then a conflict.
  All those following factors can make a doctor an unreliable narrator: his predictions are wrong, his successes are not duplicated –the loss of validity and consistency- leads to the feeling that he is not telling the truth since the outcome does not happen the way he describes. With that, the belief, trust in him is gone and the doctor “malgre lui” becomes an unreliable narrator. That pertains to the case of unwanted outcome from unpredictable factors (chance?). 
  What if on the contrary the physician has an agenda to fulfill? He must complete a research project, therefore he will need such number of cases and it happens that you meet the criteria of enrollment; he has to convince you to have the proposed treatment. His narrative will content the intention. It can be artistically concealed but the message still content the intention. In that case intentionality makes the narrative unreliable: you have to do this because it is in your best interest to do so (which he should rather say instead: in my best interest, or more cynical, in the name of science).
  This situation can present in other settings. Due to the physician’s environment, education, belief shaped by his practices he may presents the case’s outcome differently. Focalization is a common thing in medicine. Pulmonologists have no difficulty keeping a patient on respirator for years, “it helps the patient breathes” but what is the quality of life? A cardiologist: lets stent him, an oncologist: some more chemotherapy, everybody look at the patient through his optics, priorities or interests. And everybody try to present his narrative under his optics which are narrow and limited in nature. Those goals may not fit together. You have here inconsistency. And inconsistency suggests unreliability.
  Alteration, framing the narrative, selective appropriation, spatial framing, and all those procedures influence the meaning and interpretation of the text or speech. “Oh there are some possible “minor” complications, you may bleed, have a little cancer, infection but talk to your doctor about this drug for a skin condition. Are you ready to exchange your life for a perfect skin? A “healthy “colon? Beautiful eyelashes?
  Besides the content, the psychological state, intentions, education, culture and background of a doctor can make him an unreliable narrator. The use of scientific language not local language or speech can obscure the meaning of the dialogue. Lay people call the trachea wind pipe, the unintentional use of scientific language by a foreign graduate may make the explanations opaque. Since most foreign graduates work in disinherited areas those doctors probably do not know much of the local slang. It can create a distance between the narrator and readers or receiving ends, or sometimes a foreign accent can create a feeling of untrustworthiness or unreliability on the receiving side.
  To come back at the beginning of the story, why the prediction about survival is so dismal? Besides the reasons cited above there one factor that limit the doctor’s accuracy is the time spent with the patient. Doctor time and patient time are different, the time for interface is minimal: a half an hour to the most is used to judge how much this patient can perform and the fact that some patients try to show their best appearances when they see doctors, those facts do not facilitate the physician evaluation: it’s rather difficult to have an accurate guess, therefore doctors have to rely on the narrative of aides, orderlies, social workers, nurses to have an accurate image of the patient. He should learn the “view” concept proposed by Foucault in his book “the Birth of the Clinics”. This image should be a synthesis of all the narratives done at different levels of interaction or viewpoints to be accurate, humane and thorough. It should contain the physical and psychological component. Short of this it will be always an unreliable narrative. There is no poor historian but a poorly done or incomplete narrative.